LFM2 and Qwen3-Next CB Infer (#3687)
openvinotoolkit/openvino.genai: site/docs/concepts/optimization-techniques/hybrid-attention-models-cache.md

---
sidebar_position: 5
---

# Hybrid Attention Model Cache Management

## Overview

> Some models combine more than one cache type during continuous batching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some models combine more than one cache type in their architecture.
```

The most common hybrid case is a model that uses both:

- regular KV-cache inputs for attention layers

> - linear-attention state tables for layers such as CausalConv1D or GatedDeltaNet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- linear-attention state tables for layers such as `CausalConv1D` or `GatedDeltaNet`.
```

These models do not have a single cache pool.
They have at least two different cache pools with different growth rules:

- KV cache is token-driven
- linear-attention cache is either sequence-driven or interval-driven, depending on whether prefix caching is enabled

This distinction matters when configuring `SchedulerConfig`, because the same setting can affect the two cache types differently.

## Cache Types in Hybrid Models

### KV cache

> KV cache capacity is measured in blocks, and each block stores a fixed number of tokens determined by the target device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
KV cache capacity is measured in blocks, and each block corresponds to a fixed number of tokens determined by the target device.
```

Increasing KV capacity increases the number of tokens that can remain resident across active sequences.

Relevant settings:

- `num_kv_blocks`
- `cache_size`
- `use_cache_eviction`

### Linear-attention cache without prefix caching

When `enable_prefix_caching=false`, linear-attention cache behaves like a fixed-size state per live sequence.
Each sequence needs a fixed number of linear-attention blocks, regardless of prompt length.

When `num_linear_attention_blocks=0`, the runtime derives this capacity differently for two common cases:

- if `max_num_batched_tokens == std::numeric_limits<size_t>::max()`, it treats the configuration as a client-style latency scenario and starts with `1` linear-attention block
- otherwise it treats the configuration as bounded batching and derives linear-attention capacity from `max_num_seqs`

Relevant settings:

- `num_linear_attention_blocks`
- `max_num_batched_tokens`
- `max_num_seqs`

### Linear-attention cache with prefix caching

When `enable_prefix_caching=true`, linear-attention cache switches to paged checkpointing mode.

> Instead of allocating one fixed state block per sequence, the runtime stores checkpoints every `cache_interval` tokens.

Reviewer: This looks critical. KV cache block size is determined only by the device. Why a separate `cache_interval` needed for linear state?

Author: `cache_interval` allows to regulate LACache memory consumption for prefix caching scenario. For KVCache we have to store all states regardless of block size, so no memory consumption difference there.

Reviewer: It's not useful to store a linear state if it's not on KV cache block boundary

Author: Yes, I will add the check for it.

Reviewer: That would require users guess the block size upfront. Can `cache_interval` be a multiplier instead with a default of 1?

Author: Should we mention that in the config description? We do not expose KV cache block size.

Reviewer: The multiplier may be a float. As an example this allows restoring 2 out of 3 blocks if someone wants granular cache but can't afford the exact `1` because of memory

Reviewer: > Should we mention that in the config description? We do not expose KV cache block size.

Yes. Make it less magic :)

Author: Added that to `cache_interval` description in the config and assert during cache construction.

Author: > Can cache_interval be a multiplier instead with a default of 1?

This will change memory requirement when user switches from GPU to CPU and vice versa. Might be unexpected.

Reviewer: The same is true for KV blocks. I think GenAI is already in this problem, so it's fine to get 1 more feature depending on that.

Author: > The same is true for KV blocks

Yep. I think blocks is the wrong abstraction here, better to ask for specific number of tokens.

Reviewer: The design is already bad. Consistency beats incomplete design fix

Author: This was a comment for the future.

Reviewer: Do we agree to use a multiplier as the parameter instead of the absolute value?

Author: Yes, I will refactor it. But only whole numbers will be allowed, because 1.5 will have the same as 3 for prefix_cahing, but with twice memory consumption.

Reviewer: That was the point. You can use float but only allow integers for now. That way we will know if someone needs more granular values

Author: Done.

Relevant settings:

- `num_linear_attention_blocks`
- `cache_interval`
- `num_kv_blocks`
- `cache_size`

Smaller `cache_interval` values create more checkpoints and consume more linear-attention memory.
Larger values reduce memory usage but make checkpointing coarser.

## How SchedulerConfig Is Interpreted

For hybrid-attention models, the following rules are the most useful mental model.

### Constructor defaults matter

> The starting `SchedulerConfig` depends on which pipeline constructor reaches Continuous Batching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The starting `SchedulerConfig` depends on pipeline type
```

> The starting `SchedulerConfig` depends on which pipeline constructor reaches Continuous Batching.

Author: ```suggestion
The starting `SchedulerConfig` depends on pipeline constructor type.
```

> `LLMPipeline` constructors that create the Continuous Batching adapter use a latency-oriented default scheduler configuration when the user does not pass an explicit scheduler config in properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`LLMPipeline` and `VLMPipeline` constructors that utilize Continuous Batching use a latency-oriented default scheduler configuration if the user does not pass a scheduler config in `properties`.
```

Author: Applied.

> `LLMPipeline` constructors that create the Continuous Batching adapter use a latency-oriented default scheduler configuration when the user does not pass an explicit scheduler config in properties.

Author: ```suggestion
`LLMPipeline` and `VLMPipeline` constructors that utilize Continuous Batching use a latency-oriented default scheduler configuration if the user does not pass a scheduler config in `properties`. It is optimized for local non-concurrent usage.
```

> That default changes two important fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That default changes two fields:
```
That's subjective :)

- `max_num_batched_tokens = std::numeric_limits<size_t>::max()`
- `enable_prefix_caching = true`

> This matters for hybrid-attention models because unlimited `max_num_batched_tokens` is treated as the client-style signal in non-prefix mode.

Reviewer: Define "non-prefix mode". You wrote
> `enable_prefix_caching = true`

why is it non-prefix now?

Author: Deleted

> This matters for hybrid-attention models because unlimited `max_num_batched_tokens` is treated as the client-style signal in non-prefix mode.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> `ContinuousBatchingPipeline` constructors do not infer that latency-oriented profile on their own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ContinuousBatchingPipeline` constructors do not assume that latency-oriented profile.
```

They use the `SchedulerConfig` object that the caller provides.
If the caller default-constructs `SchedulerConfig`, the relevant defaults remain:

- `max_num_batched_tokens = 256`
- `max_num_seqs = 256`

> - `enable_prefix_caching = false`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They use the `SchedulerConfig` object that the caller provides.
```
You don't need to teach how constructor default values work

As a result, the same hybrid-attention model can start with different automatic linear-attention sizing depending on the constructor path unless these fields are set explicitly.

### Explicit KV capacity

> If `num_kv_blocks > 0`, it is treated as the explicit KV target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
What is KV target? Same for KV token target below. Should it be KV token target size

If `num_linear_attention_blocks` is left at `0`, the runtime derives linear-attention capacity automatically:

- with `enable_prefix_caching=false` and unlimited `max_num_batched_tokens`, it starts with `1` linear-attention block
- with `enable_prefix_caching=false` and bounded `max_num_batched_tokens`, it derives linear-attention blocks from `max_num_seqs`

> - with `enable_prefix_caching=true`, it derives linear-attention blocks from the KV token target and `cache_interval`

Reviewer: What's the derivation process, what if the KV token target and `cache_interval` conflict

Author: Add a formula

> - with `enable_prefix_caching=true`, it derives linear-attention blocks from the KV token target and `cache_interval`

Author: ```suggestion
- with `enable_prefix_caching=true`, it derives linear-attention blocks as `ceil(num_kv_blocks * kv_block_size / cache_interval)`
```
